[Music]
twelve defense intelligence
since World War two the intelligence
organization of the Department of
Defense and the Armed Services has been
subject to a variety of changes which
have sought to reduce the independence
of the nation's fighting forces by
unifying their administration with a
view toward promoting a more effective
use of resources this effort began in a
grand manner with the creation of the
national military establishment and the
office of the secretary of defense in
1947 and the institution of the
department of defense
two years later intelligence was but one
common defense function which was
greeted by the unification trend at the
end of World War two the Joint Chiefs of
Staff decided to continue the Joint
Intelligence Committee created in 1942
as a coordinating mechanism with the
demise of the Office of Strategic
Services in 1945 the Joint Chiefs
created the Joint Intelligence Group
sometimes referred to as j2 within its
Joint Staff authorized by the National
Security Act of 1947 in 1961 the Joint
Intelligence Group was supplanted by the
newly created Defense Intelligence
Agency which assumed the role of
principal coordinator for intelligence
matters among the Armed Services quote
until 1961 coordination with the
civilian side of the Department of
Defense was maintained through the
defense Secretary's assistant for
Special Operations who served as
principal aide to the secretary and
deputy secretary on all matters
pertaining to the national intelligence
effort the office of Assistant for
Special Operations rather suddenly
disappeared in the aftermath of the Bay
of Pigs disaster in 1961 another
arrangement never publicized was made
for a special assistant to the defense
secretary to supervise these activities
he represented the secretary on special
interdepartmental intelligence boards
and committees endquote
intelligence coordination matters were
given a significant impetus in 1972
when an assistant secretary ship was
created to supervise defense
intelligence programs through the entire
management cycle from initial research
and development through programming
budgeting and the final process of
follow-up evaluation and to provide the
principal point for management and
policy coordination with the Director of
Central Intelligence the CIA and other
intelligence officials and agencies
outside the Department of Defense the
new assistant secretary of defense
intelligence also has management
overview responsibilities with regard to
the Defense Intelligence Agency and the
National Security Administration in
terms of coordinating their programs
with those of the other Defense
Department intelligence functionaries
established by a departmental directive
DoD five-10 5.21 dated August 1st 1961
the Defense Intelligence Agency is
responsible for one the organization
Direction management and control of all
Department of Defense intelligence
resources assigned to or included within
the DIA to review and coordination of
those Department of Defense Intelligence
functions retained by or assigned to the
military departments overall guidance
for the conduct and management of such
functions will be developed by the
director dia for review approval and
promulgation by the Secretary of Defense
three supervision of the execution of
all approved plans programs policies and
procedures for intelligence functions
not assigned to dia for obtaining the
maximum economy and efficiency in the
allocation and management of Department
of Defense intelligence resources this
includes analysis of those DoD
intelligence activities and facilities
which can be fully integrated or
collected with non DoD intelligence
organizations five responding directly
to priority requests levied upon the
Defense Intelligence Agency by us IB
United States intelligence
and six satisfying the intelligence
requirements of the major components of
the Department of Defense the agency was
a byproduct of the post-sputnik missile
gap controversy of the late 1950s faced
with disparate estimates of Soviet
missile strength from each of the armed
services which translated into what had
been called self-serving budget requests
for weapons for defense the United
States intelligence board created a
joint study group in 1959 to study the
intelligence producing agencies in 1960
this panel returned various
recommendations among which were
proposals for the consignment of the
Defense Department's to observer rather
than member status on the intelligence
board and the creation of a coordinating
Defense Intelligence Agency which would
represent the Armed Services as a member
of u.s. IB Defense Secretary Robert
McNamara adopted these proposals the
director of DIA functions as the
principal intelligence staff officer to
both the Secretary of Defense and the
Joint Chiefs of Staff reporting to the
secretary through the Joint Chiefs the
director is also commander of the
defense attache system and chairman of
the weekly meetings of the military
intelligence board composed of the
Chiefs of the four Armed Services in
addition to a general counsel office an
inspector general unit and a scientific
advisory committee the defense
intelligence agency presently consists
of the following components which
respond directly to the director deputy
director leadership chief of staff
deputy for management and plans policy
development and coordination plans
operations management and formulation of
requirements for functional management
systems deputy director for intelligence
including responsibility for all source
finished military intelligence but not
scientific and technical intelligence
maintenance of target systems and
physical vulnerability research military
capabilities and current intelligence
assessments report
and warning deputy director for
collection deputy director for
scientific and technical intelligence
deputy director for estimates deputy
director for anti che and human
resources deputy director for support
support activities and administrative
services deputy director for information
systems intelligence information and
telecommunication systems deputy
director for personnel Comptroller and
the Defense Intelligence School created
in 1962 and supervised by a commandant
footnote earlier organization models for
the Defense Intelligence Agency may be
found in McCloskey 1967 pages 92 through
93 Ransome 1970 page 105 kirkpatrick
1973 pages 40 through 41 in footnote the
National Security Agency an
independently organized entity within
the Department of Defense is the product
of efforts at unifying and coordinating
defense Cryptologic and communications
security functions quote in the first
post-war years the Cryptologic duties of
the American armed forces reposed in the
separate agencies of the army the Navy
and the Air Force the army at least
charged its agency with maintaining
liaison with the Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force and other
appropriate agencies for the purpose of
coordinating communication security and
communication intelligence equipment and
procedures presumably the Navy and the
Air Force units were similarly charged
this arrangement which relied on
internal desire instead of external
direction prolonged the abuses once
hinted at by General Douglas MacArthur's
world war two intelligence chief Major
General Charles a Willoughby to rectify
them and achieve the benefits of
centralized control the Defense
Department in 1949 established the Armed
Forces Security Agency the AFSA took
over the strategic communications
intelligence functions and the
coordination responsibilities of the
individual
Agencies it left them with tactical
communications intelligence which can
best be performed near the point of
combat and not at a central location
except for basic system solutions and
with low issue on communication security
which differs radically in ground sea
and air forces even in these areas AFSA
backed them up AFSA drew its personnel
from the separate departmental agencies
though it later hired separately and
housed itself in their buildings end
quote
the success of the unified approach to
cryptology evidenced by the operations
of the Armed Forces Security Agency
warranted an expansion of that
institution to include crypto systems
outside of the Defense Department such
as those maintained by state accordingly
President Truman promulgated a
classified directive creating the
National Security Agency on November 4th
1952 abolishing the Armed Forces
Security Agency and transferring its
assets and personnel to the new
successor such an aura of official
secrecy surrounded NSA that no
acknowledgement of its existence
appeared in the government organization
manuals until 1957 when a brief but
vague description was offered in brief
according to one expert NSA quote
creates and supervises the cryptography
of all US government agencies end quote
and quote it interprets traffic analyzes
and crypt analyzes the messages of all
other nations friend as well as foe end
quote it is the American Black Chamber
reincarnated with the most highly
sophisticated technology available an
estimated staff of 20,000 employees at
its home base Fort Meade Maryland with
between 50,000 to 100,000 persons in its
service overseas and an annual budget
thought to range between 1 and 1.2
billion dollars
footnote Douglas Watson NSA America's
vacuum cleaner of intelligence
Washington Post March 2nd 1975 in
footnote according to best estimates the
National Security Agency is organized
into three operating divisions the
office of production code and cipher
braking the office of communications
security code and cipher production and
the office of research and development
digital computing and radio propagation
research crypt analysis and development
of communications equipment and
supporting units for recruiting and
hiring training and the maintenance of
both physical and personnel security in
November in 1971 President Nixon
directed certain changes in the
organization of the intelligence
community among them the creation of a
National Cryptologic command under the
director of the National Security Agency
the result of this announcement was the
organization of the central security
service comprised of the Army Security
Agency the naval security group and the
US Air Force security service with the
NSA director concurrently serving as the
chief CSS apparently established to
consolidate the cryptanalytic activities
of the Armed Services the official
purpose of CSS has stated in the fiscal
year 1973 annual Defense Department
report to Congress is to quote provide a
unified more economical and more
effective structure for executing
Cryptologic and related electronic
operations previously conducted under
the military departments the military
departments will retain administrative
and logistic support responsibilities
for the military units involved but
these units will be managed and
controlled by the CSS end quote
footnote US Department of Defense
national security of realistic
deterrence page 135 and footnote the 19
intelligence community reorganization
also called for the consolidation of all
Defense Department personnel security
investigations into a single Office of
Defense investigations from this mandate
a departmental directive DoD 5105 dot
for two dated April 18 1972 was issued
chartering the defense Investigative
Service operational as of October 1st of
that year the service consists of a
director a headquarters establishment
fourteen district offices and various
subordinate field offices and resident
agencies throughout the United States
and Puerto Rico the service examines
allegations of criminal and or
subversive behavior attributed to
potential and actual Defense Department
employees holding sensitive positions
the 1971 reorganization quote also
directed that a defense map agency be
created by combining the now separate
mapping charting and geodetic
organizations of the military services
in order to achieve maximum efficiency
and economy and production end quote the
result of this mandate was the
establishment of the defense mapping
agency on January 1st 1972 under the
provisions of the National Security Act
of 1947 as amended with a director
responsible to the Secretary of Defense
through the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the
aftermath of these unification efforts
within the defense establishment each of
the Armed Services continues to maintain
an intelligence organization and their
departments control their own
intelligence production activities
particularly tactical or combat
intelligence affecting their operations
cryptological mapping and pertinent
personnel security investigation
functions having been consolidated for
administration as discussed above an
assistant chief of staff for
intelligence g2 has continued with the
army general staff since World War two
this officer supervised the army
intelligence corps which included both
collection and analysis functions
and the army security agency established
September 15 1945 to execute Cryptologic
duties in June 1962 a major
reorganization of army intelligence
operations brought about the merger of
these two units into the army
intelligence and security branch quote
prior to January 1st 1965 the Military
District of Washington and each of the
six armies within the United States were
responsible for counterintelligence
activities throughout their geographic
areas and controlled an intelligence
core group which carried on these
activities on January 1st 1965 the seven
intelligence core groups were
consolidated into a new major command US
Army Intelligence Corps command about
two months later it was redesignated the
US Army Intelligence command end quote
this command located at Fort Holabird
Maryland continues to function as a
primary army intelligence entity under
g2 the Army's Security Agency appears to
have less direct intelligence production
significance for g2 in the aftermath of
the 1971 reorganization when it was
placed under the control of the chief of
the central security service other army
agencies such as the Army transportation
Corps are capable of contributing an
intelligence product should g2 consult
them regarding some aspect of their
expertise during the Army's most recent
major commitment of forces in Southeast
Asia a combined intelligence
organization was maintained in Vietnam
the structure was headed by an assistant
chief of staff military assistance
command Vietnam j2 who is responsible
for exercising general staff supervision
over all Army Navy Air Force and Marine
Corps intelligence activities as well as
serving as assistant chief of staff for
intelligence g2 to general william
Westmoreland commanding general US Army
Vietnam the Office of Naval Intelligence
is currently called the Naval
Intelligence command and continues to
report to the chief of naval operations
patience through the command support
programs office quote the field
organization for carrying out o ni s
missions has three major components one
naval district intelligence officers
under the management control of omi and
operating in the United States and
certain outlying areas two intelligence
organizations with the forces of float
which are directly under unit commanders
with overall Oh n IC provision and three
naval attache x' functioning under o ni
direction as well as State Department
and Defense Intelligence Agency
supervisions district intelligence
officers operate primarily in
counterintelligence and Security fields
the district intelligence office D IO is
directly responsible to the naval
district commandant with additional duty
in some areas on the staff of the
commander of the sea frontier of his
district civilian agents usually are
assigned to the district intelligence
officers along with naval intelligence
officers and the former conduct security
and major criminal investigations
involving naval personnel or material
with the forces of float or an overseas
basis flag officers in command of each
area fleet or Task Force have staff
intelligence sections functioning
primarily in the operational or tactical
intelligence field the intelligence
officer who heads this staff section
works not only for the unit commander
but also performs some collection
missions for omi naval attache trained
by oh ni and intelligence and languages
collect naval intelligence for o ni as
well as serve the diplomatic chief at
the post to which they are assigned end
quote
while o and i serves certain of its
intelligence needs the Marine Corps
quote maintains a small intelligence
staff in its headquarters and
intelligence officers are billeted
throughout the core end quote and these
personnel quote are concerned primarily
with tactical or operational rather than
national intelligence end quote
transferred to the name
Department for wartime service in 1941
the Coast Guard was returned to the
Treasury Department in 1946 and has
maintained a very small Intelligence
Unit quote mainly concerned with port
security keeping subversive elements out
of the Merchant Marine and off the
waterfront and forcing Coast Guard laws
and ensuring the internal security of
the Coast Guard end quote
when the United States Air Force became
a separate service apart from the Army
in 1947 a General Staff Directorate
called the Air Staff was instituted with
an assistant chief of staff for
intelligence ACSI and sometimes still
unofficially referred to as a to this
officer supervises an immediate office
organized into a special Advisory Group
a brains trust designed to keep the ASCI
abreast of scientific technical and
strategic matters of prime concern to
the Air Arm a data handling systems
group a policy and programs unit a
resources management component a
collection Directorate and a strategic
estimates Directorate the ASCI has also
held staff supervision authority of the
USAF security service personnel and
physical security and the aeronautical
chart and information center
aeronautical charts graphic error target
materials flight information
publications and documents terrain
models maps evaluated intelligence on
air facilities geodetic and geophysical
data and related cartographic services
overseas anti-phase are administered
through the collection Directorate which
at one time included a reconnaissance
division acknowledged to be charged with
overseeing the development of the latest
spy in the sky equipment some of it
exotic this entity may have been
displaced by the National Reconnaissance
Office an Air Force intelligence agency
only recently disclosed to exist which
reportedly operates satellite
intelligence programs for the entire
intelligence community on a budget
estimated at more than 1.5 billion
dollars a year
[Music]
this is our hidden history